The beginning of everything. The Big Bang. The idea that the universe was suddenly born and is not
infinite. Up to the middle of the 20th century, most scientists thought of the universe as
infinite and ageless. Until Einstein's theory of relativity gave us a better understanding of
gravity and Edwin Hubble discovered that galaxies are moving apart from one another in a way that
fits previous predictions. In 1964, by accident, cosmic background radiation was discovered,
a relic of the early universe, which together with other observational evidence made the Big
Bang the accepted theory in science. Since then, improved technology like the Hubble telescope has
given us a pretty good picture of the Big Bang and the structure of the cosmos. Recent observations
even seem to suggest that the expansion of the universe is accelerating. But how did this Big
Bang work? How can something come from nothing? Let's explore what we know. We can ignore the
beginning part for now. First of all, the Big Bang was not an explosion. It was all space,
stretching everywhere all at once. The universe started very, very, very small and quickly
expanded to the size of a football. The universe didn't expand into anything. Space was just
expanding into itself. The universe cannot expand into anything because the universe has no borders.
There is by definition, no outside the universe. The universe is all there is. In this hot,
dense environment, energy manifested itself in particles that existed only for the tiniest
glimpses of time. From gluons, pairs of quarks were created, which destroyed one another,
perhaps after giving off more gluons. These found other short-lived quarks to interact with,
forming new quark pairs and gluons again. Matter and energy were not just theoretically equivalent,
it was so hot, they were practically the same stuff. Somewhere around this time, matter won
over antimatter. Today, we're left with almost all matter and nearly no antimatter at all.
Somehow, one billion and one matter particles were formed for every one billion particles of
antimatter. Instead of one massive ultimate force in the universe, there were now several
refined versions of it acting under different rules. By now, the universe has stretched to a
billion kilometers in diameter, which leads to a decrease in temperature. The cycle of quarks being
born and converted back to energy suddenly stops. From now on, we work with what we have.
Quarks begin forming new particles, hadrons, like protons and neutrons. There are many,
many combinations of quarks that can form all sorts of hadrons, but only very few are reasonably
stable for any length of time. Please take a moment to appreciate that by now, only one second has
passed since the beginning of everything. The universe, which has grown to 100 billion
kilometers, is now cold enough to allow most of the neutrons to decay into protons and form the
first atom, hydrogen. Imagine the universe at this point as an extremely hot soup, 10 billion degrees
Celsius, filled with countless particles and energy. Over the next few minutes, things cooled
and settled down very fast. Atoms formed out of hadrons and electrons, making for a stable and
electrically neutral environment. Some call this period the Dark Age, because there were no stars
and the hydrogen gas didn't allow visible light to move around. But what's the meaning of visible
light anyway, when there's nothing alive yet that could have eyes? When the hydrogen gas clumped
together after millions of years, and gravity put it under great pressure, stars and galaxies began
to form. Their radiation dissolved the stable hydrogen gas into a plasma that still permeates
the universe today and allows a visible light to pass. Finally, there was light. Okay, but what
about the part we didn't talk about? What happened right at the beginning? This part can be defined
as the Big Bang. We don't know at all what happened here. At this point, our tools break down.
Natural laws stop making sense. Time itself becomes wibbly-wobbly. To understand what happened
here, we need a theory that unifies Einstein's relativity and quantum mechanics, something
countless scientists are working on right now. But this leaves us with lots of unanswered questions.
Were there universes before our own? Is this the first and the only universe? What started the Big
Bang? Or did it just occur naturally based on laws we don't understand yet? We don't know,
and maybe we never will. But what we do know is that the universe as we know it started here,
and gave birth to particles, galaxies, stars, the Earth, and you. Since we ourselves are made of
dead stars, we are not separate from the universe. We are part of it. You could even say that we are
the universe's way of experiencing itself. So let's keep on experiencing it until there
are no more questions to ask.
you